---
layout: layouts/classnote.njk
title: math 254a - lec 02
class: math 254a
lec_date: "2025-08-29"
---

Today we covered Dedekind domains (DD).

<div class = "subthm-box" type = "rmk">
    In some sense, DVRs are a "local" version of the "global" DDs.
</div>

We add some other definitions of DVRs.

<div class = "subthm-box" type = "prop">
    Let $A$ be an integral domain and $K$ its fraction field. The following are equivalent:
    <ol class = "parentheses">
        <li> $A$ is a DVR.</li>
        <li> $A$ is Noetherian, integrally closed (if $a \in K$, $f\in A[x]$ is monic so $f(a) = 0$ implies $a \in A$), and has a unique nonzero prime ideal.</li>
        <li> $A$ is Noetherian, local ($\mm$), and $\mm$ is principal.</li>
    </ol>
</div>

<div class = "subthm-box" type = "proof">
    $(1) \implies (2):$ A DVR is a PID by definition. PIDs are Noetherian per a proof from the last lecture. 

    Next, we show that any PID is integrally closed:

    <div class = "subthm-box" type = "lemma">
        
        
        Fix $a = \frac{c}{d} \in K$ and some monic $f = x^n - \sum^{n-1}_0 b_ix^i \in A[x]$ so that $f(a) = 0$. Recall any PID is a UFD so we can do this such that $\gcd(c,d) = 1$. 
        
        Thus, $a^n = \sum^{n-1}_0 b_ia^i$ so $$c^n = \sum_0^{n-1} b_ic^id^{n-i} = d \sum_0^{n-1} b_i c^i d^{n-i-1}.$$

        So $d | c^n$. But $(c^n, d) = 1$ since $(c,d) = 1$ so $d$ is a unit in $A$ putting $a =  cd\inv \in A$.
    </div>

    Lastly, we show $A$ has a unique nonzero prime. From a proof from the last lecture, any ideal in a DVR is $(\pi^k)$ for $k \in \N$ and $\mm = (\pi)$; observe $A / (\pi^k)$ is clearly not an integral domain unless $k = 1$ so $\mm$ is the unique nonzero prime ideal.

    <i>Professor Shin skipped this next part in class. I'm using A-M as a reference.</i>

    $(2) \implies (3):$ The only hard part is showing $\mm$ is principal. Pick $a \in \mm$ nonzero. $(a) \neq (0),(1)$ because it is nonzero and in $\mm$ so not a unit. The radical $r(a)$ is the intersection of all primes containing $a$, but that is just $\mm$.

    By $A$ Noetherian, $\mm$ is generated by $x_1, \ldots, x_k$. Say $n$ is the largest $n_i$ so $x_i^{n_i} \in a$ and put $m = kn$. $r(a)^m$ is made up of $x_1^{r_1}\cdots x_n^{r_n}$ with $\sum r_i = m$ so at least one $x_i^{r_i} \in a$ putting $(a) \supset r(a)^m = \mm^m$. We can find the least $N$ so $\mm^N \supset (a)$. Picking $b \in \mm^{N-1} - (a)$, we know $\frac{a}{b} \in K, \frac{b}{a} \notin A$ because $b \notin (a)$. 
    
    $A$ is integrally closed so $\frac{b}{a}$ is not integral over $A$. It follows that $\frac{b}{a}\mm \subsetneq \mm$ because of 5.1 in A-M, but this is obviously absurd. So $\frac{b}{a} \mm = A$ implying $\mm = A \frac{a}{b} = (\frac{a}{b})$ where $\frac{a}{b} \in A$ so $\mm$ is principal.

    $(3) \implies (1):$ We will build a valuation. Say $\mm = (\pi)$. Consider $$A \supsetneq (\pi) \supsetneq (\pi^2) \supset \cdots.$$ <i>(If any $(\pi^m) \subset (\pi^{m+1})$ then $\pi^m = a\pi^{m+1}$ for some $a \in A$ implying $1 = a\pi$ so $\pi$ would be a unit.)</i>

    We claim $\bigcap (\pi^n) = (0)$. The idea here is that, to apply the Noetherian condition, we must 'reverse' the inclusions somehow. Pick $y \in \bigcap (\pi^n)$ and write $y = x_n\pi^n$ for each $n \in \N$. Now, $$(x_1) \subset (x_2) \subset \cdots \overset{\text{Noetherian}}{\implies} (x_N) = (x_{N+1}) = \cdots$$

    So $x_{N+1} = bx_N$ for $b \in A$ but $x_N = \pi x_{N+1}$, hence $x_{N+1}(1-b\pi) = 0$. $A$ is an integral domain so either $1 = b\pi$ (impossible since $\pi$ cannot be a unit) or $x_{N+1} = 0$. Thus, $y = 0$ and our claim is done.

    It follows that every $a \in A$ exists in some $(\pi^i) - (\pi^{i+1})$. We define the valuation $\nu(a) = i$. Obviously, $\nu$ is surjective and if $a, b \in (\pi^j) - (\pi^{j+1}), (\pi^k) - (\pi^{k+1})$ respectively, then $ab \in (\pi^{j+k}) - (\pi^{j+k+1})$ and $a+b \in (\pi^{\min(j,k)}) - (\pi^{\min(j,k)+1})$. So both $\nu(ab) = j+k = \nu(a) + \nu(k)$ and $\nu(a+b) \geq \min \\{\nu(a), \nu(b)\\}$.

    And of course, $A_\nu = A$ since $A = ((\pi^0) - (\pi^1)) \sqcup ((\pi^1) - (\pi^2)) \sqcup \cdots$.
</div>

Now, here is a reminder on localization (simplified to just cover integral domains rather than generic rings).

<div class = "subthm-box" type = "recall">
    Fix an integral domain $A$.

    A multiplicative subset $S \subset A$ is any set without $0$, with $1$, and where $a,b \in S$ implies $ab \in S$. We can take fractions $S\inv A = \\{\frac{a}{b}: a \in A, b \in S\\} \subset \text{Frac}(A)$.

    <div class = "subthm-box" type = "rmk">
        There is a very nice correspondence here:
        \begin{align*}
            \text{Spec } S\inv A & \overset{1-1}\longleftrightarrow \pp \subset A \text{ prime such that } \pp \cap S = \0 \\\\
            S\inv A \pp & \\; \mapsfrom \\; \\; \pp \\\\
            \qq & \\; \\; \mapsto \\;\\; \qq \cap A
        \end{align*}
    </div>

    If $\pp \subset A$ is prime, and $S = A - \pp$, we say $A_\pp = S\inv A$ is the localization at $\pp$. From the remark, $$\text{Spec } A_\pp \longleftrightarrow \\{\pp' \subset \text{Spec}A, \\; \pp' \subset \pp\\}.$$ And of course, the order hierarchy is preserved both ways.
</div>

<div class = "subthm-box" type = "prop">
    Let $A$ be a Noetherian integral domain. The following are equivalent:

    <ol class = "parentheses">
       <li>For all nonzero primes $\pp \lhd A$, $A_\pp$ is a DVR. ($A$ is "locally DVR").</li>
       <li>$A$ is integrally closed and every nonzero prime is maximal.</li>
    </ol>
</div>

<div class = "subthm-box" type = "def" name = "dededkind domain">
    A ring satisfying the above proposition is a <u>Dedekind domain</u>.
</div>

<div class = "subthm-box" type = "proof">
    $(1) \implies (2):$ If a nonzero prime was not maximal, we would have a chain $0 \subsetneq \pp \subsetneq \mm$ in $A$. $A_\mm$ would not be a DVR because it is dimension 2, but obviously $\mm$ is prime. 

    From earlier, $A_\pp$ is integrally closed because it is a DVR. Thus, for any $a \in K = \text{Frac}(A)$ and monic $f \in A[x]$ with $f(a) = 0$, we know $f \in A_\pp[x]$ implying $a \in A_\pp$ for every nonzero prime $\pp$. Thus, $a \in \bigcap_{\pp \neq 0} A_\pp$. Note any $\pp \neq 0$ is maximal by the first paragraph.

    To show this intersection is actually $A$ requires a lemma:

    <div class = "subthm-box" type = "lemma">
        We claim $B = \bigcap_{\mm \neq 0 \text{ maximal }} B_\mm = B$ for any integral domain $B$.

        $\subset$ is obvious. Conversely, notice every $B_m \subset \text{Frac}(B)$ so we can write $x \in \bigcap B_m$ as $\frac{a}{b}$ for $b$ nonzero. By definition of $B_\mm$, $b$ exists in the complement of all the maximal ideals. If $b$ was not a unit, then $(b)$ must be contained in a nonzero maximal ideal (since $b \neq 0$) but that is impossible, so $(b) = 1$ meaning $b$ is a unit in $B$. Thus, $ab\inv \in B$.
    </div>

    Therefore, $a \in \bigcap_{\pp \neq 0} A_\pp = A$ so $A$ is integrally closed.

    $(2) \implies (1):$ We use condition (2) from today's first proposition.
    
    We assume $A$ is Noetherian so every ideal in $A$ is finitely generated. Given some ideal $a \lhd A_\pp$, any element $\frac{c}{d} \in a$ implies $\frac{c}{1}$ is also in the ideal so $a$ pulls back to an ideal in $A$ with generators $x_1, \ldots, x_k$ meaning $a$ is generated by $\frac{x_i}{1}$ and thus $A_\pp$ is Noetherian too.

    Now, another small lemma:

    <div class = "subthm-box" type = "lemma">
        Say $A \subseteq B$ are rings and $C$ is the integral closure of $A$ in $B$. For a multiplicative subset $S$ in $A$, we claim $S\inv C$ is the integral closure of $S\inv A$ in $S \inv B$.

        $S\inv C$ is integral over $S\inv A$ because if $x/s \in S\inv C$, $x$ is integral over $A$ so we know $x^n + \sum a_i x^i = 0$ for some $a_i \in A$, implying $(x/s)^n + \sum (a_i/s^{n-i}) (x/s)^i = 0$.

        Conversely, if $b/s \in S\inv B$ is integral over $S\inv A$, then $(b/s)^n + \sum (a_i/s_i)(b/s)^{n-i} = 0$. Multiplying by $st$ for $t = s_1 \cdots s_n$ shows $bt$ is integral over $A$ so $bt \in C$. But $t \in S$ so $b/s = bt/st \in S\inv C$.
    </div>

    Applying this lemma to fraction fields and primes shows $A_\pp$ is integrally closed as long as $A$ is.

    Lastly, that every nonzero prime $\pp$ in $A$ is maximal means that $\pp A_\pp$ is the unique maximal ideal in $A_\pp$  since anything not in $\pp$ has become a unit and $\pp$ only contains the prime $0$.

</div>